[music]
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams
and this is the daily. [music]
President Trump says that the United
States has now seized an oil tanker off
the coast [music] of Venezuela. And so
this is
>> since December, the US has been stopping
and seizing oil tankers traveling in and
out of Venezuela.
>> Largest one ever seized, actually. after
President Trump imposed a blockade on
ships carrying sanctioned Venezuelan
oil.
>> Showing US helicopters surrounding the
ship. You see that there?
>> Ships that are part of what's known as a
ghost fleet.
>> That's the US Coast Guard seizing
another ghost fleet tanker.
>> This now as the US is pursuing a third
oil tanker near Venezuela.
>> Oil tankers that try to secretly make
their way around the world.
>> Four vessels are now in American
custody. Several more are being tracked.
It marks the fifth tanker the US has
seized a sixth oil tanker. Now
>> a seventh sanctioned oil tanker
>> funding pro states like Venezuela, Iran,
and Russia.
Today, my colleague Christian Tbert on
what these ghost fleets are exactly
[music] and how their days might be
numbered.
It's Tuesday, January 27th.
Christian, welcome to the Daily.
>> Thank you. So Christian, the US has been
seizing and stopping oil tankers coming
in and out of Venezuela for weeks now.
And at first this seemed like part of a
pressure campaign against President
Nicholas Maduro, but then obviously the
US captured Maduro. And I think a lot of
people assumed that this effort, this
pressure on the ships would stop, but
instead it's actually not only
continued, but expanded. You are the
newsroom's resident expert on these oil
tankers. You've been tracking all of
this as part of our visual
investigations team. So let's start at
the very beginning. What is a ghost
fleet or shadow fleet?
>> That's a very good question. Besides
shadow fleet and ghost fleet, there's a
third term which is dark fleet. So
>> it's interesting because there's not a
well- definfined definition. It's
basically a term for oil tankers that
use deceptive practices to kind of hide
that they're transporting sanctioned
oil. Oil that's sanctioned by the United
States. And these ships want to hide
that they're picking up this oil and
delivering this oil. Why do I know a lot
about it? Is because that after the
full-scale invasion of Ukraine by Russia
in February 2022,
there was this same sudden surge in
interest like ghost fleet, dark fleet,
shadow fleet. And my manager asked me
like, Chris, can you find out what are
actually the ships of this fleet? So
that's how it started for me. But there
are hundreds of tankers, maybe even
thousands. We don't really know. And
basically these tankers are shipping
sanctioned Russian oil or sanctioned
Iranian oil and Venezuelan oil. They're
always shipping oil for either of these
three countries and sometimes for all
three. Most of the oil goes to China and
a significant portion goes to India as
well and these ships have decided to do
that. There's a lot of money to make if
you're shipping sanctioned oil and
they're trying to hide that.
>> Got it. Okay. So, do you have any sense
given the fact that this is literally
called a shadow fleet of how much of the
world's oil is transported this way?
>> It's hard to say, right? Because they're
obviously trying to deceive everyone
that they're actually shipping this oil,
but it's probably around like 10 to 20%
of oil tankers worldwide that have
engaged in this kind of activity, which
is quite a bit. But given that it's only
related to Russia, Iran, and Venezuela,
the share of the oil on the world market
is about 3 to 9% according to the data
that's available.
>> So obviously sanctions are meant to hurt
countries economically, but what are the
goals in these specific cases? So the
point of these US sanctions is to
basically limit the revenue that's going
to the Kremlin to fund their war effort
in Ukraine to Iran, which the US says,
you know, they're using the revenue from
oil to fund their activities with
Hezbollah and other other activities
that the US doesn't like. And the same
with Venezuela. It's it's it's propping
up the Maduro government at the time.
>> But what we have seen is that they're
successful in shipping this oil around
the world and still earning significant
amounts of money
>> on that oil. basically nobody's stopping
them even though technically there are
sanctions in place.
>> Yes, that's exactly right. These ships
have been shipping that oil and there's
not really any kind of enforcement on
these ships. So the shipments of oil
just continue. But all of that changed
in December.
>> Okay. So let's talk about what happened
in December. What specifically did we
start seeing?
In December, there's this very large
military pressure campaign on the Maduro
government in Venezuela by the US.
>> There's a buildup of a huge military
force ahead of, of course, Maduro's
capture. But also, the Trump
administration said any oil tankers that
want to ship Venezuelan oil that is not
going to the United States, we're going
to stop these vessels, port them, and
potentially even seize them. And that
was not just like an empty threat. it
actually started happening.
>> We begin with the Trump administration's
dramatic escalation with Venezuela and
the Nicholas Maduro regime, seizing an
oil tanker off the coast of Venezuela.
>> We saw one tanker being stopped, another
tanker being stopped.
>> Commandos took over another tanker, fast
roping onto the deck and moving up to
the bridge to see
>> and another tanker being chased for
weeks
>> and this one tried to get away. It
resulted in a sort of a slow motion uh
chase. Uh
>> so basically suddenly after years of not
enforcing these sanctions the US now
seems very serious about stopping these
ghost fleets.
>> Absolutely. And it had a very
interesting effect on this very large
group of hundreds if not thousands of
tankers that are part of the shadow
fleet because we saw that other tankers
were already going to Venezuela that
kind of like turned around and were like
oh we don't want to get boarded by a US
Navy vessel.
>> They were spooked.
>> They were spooked. And at the same time,
the tankers that were already in
Venezuela were kind of like m we
probably should stay in Venezuela and
probably shouldn't leave. And then in
the beginning of January,
>> the United States of America has
successfully carried out a large-scale
strike against Venezuela and its leader,
President Nicholas Maduro, who has been
captured and flown out of the country.
>> [music]
>> The United States enters Venezuela and
captures Maduro and it's chaos. And
[music] I got this call from Anatoli,
our colleague in Venezuela, and he's
like, "Hey, Chris, I [music] am being
told that four tankers have left port."
And I'm like, "Okay, let let me check."
And [music] indeed, on satellite
imagery, it was visible that these four
tankers had departed Venezuelan waters
and were sailing north. Mhm.
>> But not only that, I also realized that
besides these four tinkers, there
[music] were 12 others that just
disappeared.
>> What do you mean by disappeared?
>> They disappeared on satellite imagery.
They were there the day before and the
next day they were gone.
>> So it seemed all these tankers left in a
coordinated effort to defy the partial
blockade by the United States on on
Venezuelan oil experts. And one expert I
talked to said this is a zombie race.
>> A zombie race,
>> right? So when you leave altogether in a
group of 16, the odds that you're going
to get caught are way smaller than when
it's just one vessel leaving or two
vessels leaving cuz the United States
has a huge military force buildup around
Venezuela. But we saw that, you know,
over the holidays for three weeks they
chase one tanker. Mhm.
>> Imagine having to chase 16 of them. So
the odds for these tankers leaving in a
coordinated effort. The odds of being
captured by the United States are way
smaller.
>> Strengthen numbers.
>> Strength in numbers indeed. Which is
very striking that you can imagine that
oh Maduro's being captured and all these
ships are basically deciding amongst
themselves, are we going to go make a
run for it
>> or not?
>> And it seemed a group of 16 indeed did.
>> [music]
>> So me and my colleagues were thinking,
what's going on? Where have these
tankers gone? And will they be able to
outrun the Americans, which would be
wild, right? Because this is arguably
the most powerful military in the world.
And are they continuing to evade these
sanctions on them or will they
eventually get caught?
>> So we set out and tried to find out.
We'll be right back.
Christian, before the break, you
described this kind of cat-and- mouse
game that the US has been playing with
these ships and this question of whether
the US will ultimately be successful in
enforcing its sanctions, specifically
with these 16 oil tankers, which as you
described seem to have just sort of
disappeared from Venezuelan waters. You
had mentioned that you and our
colleagues wanted to set out to find out
where they'd gone. Tell us how you
started doing that.
Yeah. So, these ships engage in a lot of
deceptive practices and because they use
these deceptive techniques, it's pretty
hard. But if you know where to look, you
can get some pretty good clues.
>> Well, how do you even know where to
look?
>> So, for example, every oil tanker needs
to send out a location signal, which is
for safety. They're very big, and you
know, if they don't send out a location
signal and another ship doesn't see them
in low visibility, for instance, it's
going to be a disaster. So, there's an
agreement. all the bit large ships
should send out this transponder signal.
But the transponder signal also allows
anyone on the planet to kind of see
where these ships are. Um website called
Marine Traffic and you know you can see
thousands of vessels that you can just
track in real time. But from all those
16 ships that disappeared from
Venezuelan waters, we couldn't track any
of them. Why? because they either
switched off their transponder signal,
which means going dark, or they faked
their location signal to pretend they're
actually of the coast of West Africa or
Asia. A method that's known as spoofing.
They're spoofing their location signal.
>> Okay. So, I understand all of that. I
think it sounds like it's VPN, but for
ships, right?
>> Right.
>> But then how do you actually go about
figuring out where the ships are?
>> So, we basically just look at satellite
imagery. It shows the coast. It shows
the water. And it shows ships in the
sea. And I can see there is a tanker
with a red deck. There is a larger
tanker with a green deck. And we're
trying to identify which tankers they
are.
>> Do you have picture satellite images on
your computer to show me that we can
kind of describe a little bit? Let me
I'm going to move my seat over.
>> Okay. So now what we're looking at is a
tab on this marine traffic website that
looks like a map of Venezuela with
thousands of arrows that are red or
purple or green. Tell us what these
different color codings mean and what is
an individual arrow.
>> So every arrow is a ship that's sending
out a location signal. Green means it's
carrying cargo. Purple means it's like a
pleasure craft. So like a yacht or a
cruise ship. And red are tankers. And
that's what we're interested in.
>> Okay.
>> And what you can see here is three
vessels, right?
>> I see three red arrows. Yep. Okay.
>> But if we look at the satellite image,
we can see that there are way more ships
there.
>> There are way more than three oil
tankers on the satellite image. And yet
when we look at the marine website,
you're saying there are only three ships
that are sending out transponder
signals.
>> Exactly. So all these ships that send
out a legitimate signal, they're usually
okay because they have nothing to hide,
right? They're showing that they're in
Venezuela and they're saying like that's
for anyone to see on the world. Anyone
with internet connection can see, hey,
they're sending out this signal from
Venezuela. But I'm very interested in
the ships that appear in the satellite
image, but that are not sending out a
signal. So they're not visible on that
website. So then I can try to identify
these ships by zooming in on the
satellite image, seeing what color the
deck is, how long it is, how wide it is,
and then I can check that information
against a database of tankers that I've
built up over the past few years
together with my colleagues that list
tankers that are in the shadow fleet by
name. But it's very tricky because they
change their names not only in online
registries or shipping registries, but
also when you would see the ship in
person. There's a group called tanker
trackers.com company that is specialized
in this and they have a photographer on
shore in Venezuela that kind of like
secretly takes photos of these tankers.
These photos are usually not published,
but we have access to them and we can
get an insight on how how do these ships
actually look like from the ground,
right? Sometimes we try to find out
which tankers they are by trying to see
if there's any sailors on board, any
crew members that are maybe posting a
Tik Tok video or Instagram videos.
>> What are they posting about exactly? Is
it like, "Hi, I'm on a ship
>> about their lives." And they're like
excited. Maybe it's the first time in
their lives they're in Venezuela.
They're like, "Hey, look where I am.
This is so pretty." And they're showing
their family members. They're showing
their fellow merchant navy crew members
like where they are. And it's a whole
community online. [snorts] And you know,
it's interesting like the oil is
sanctioned and they're engaged in what
the US sees as illegal activity. But of
course, like if this oil is being picked
up in Venezuela, then brought to China
and [clears throat] your crew member on
board of the ship, why would you really
care about US sanctions?
>> It feels like if you're going to go
through all this effort to obscure your
name and location, you would tell the
people that work on your ship, please
don't post to Tik Tok. [snorts]
>> You would think so, but it seems uh we
as human beings just love to share
things on social media.
>> I guess so. What can you learn from
these photos and videos? Then
>> what [clears throat] is very fascinating
is that we have seen ships that are
obscuring their own name. Mhm.
>> In in very like kind of like rudimentary
ways like we've seen bed sheets being
hung over the hole to obscure the name
and in many instances actually we have
seen them just like completely painting
over their actual name and just putting
on the name not of a fake ship but of a
real ship that is kind of like the same
in its appearance but a ship that
actually when you go to databases you
realize that's a ship that has been sent
to the scrapyard doesn't exist anymore.
So, it's a lot of ways of obscuring
their real identities, but that makes it
also kind of fascinating and and fun to
find out, can I find out which tanker it
is?
>> Okay, so they're hiding where they are.
They're hiding their real names. What
else are they doing in order to operate
in secret?
>> So, they also change their flag. So, all
these large vessels need to be
registered in a country and then they're
flying the flag of that country. So they
can for instance say like oh we're
flying the flag of Cameroon or the
Marshall Islands or Panama or Ghana. Um
but actually when you go to the shipping
registries of these countries it turns
out that they're at times not even
registered there. So they're flying a
fake flag. And what we've seen recently
a lot is ships changing their flags to
Russia.
>> And why Russia?
>> Because they think it will protect them
against US. Like boarding a vessel like
US is boarding vessels and saying, "Hey,
you're not flying a real flag." But
boarding a ship that actually flies an
official Russian flag is a whole another
thing. It could cause a major diplomatic
crisis between these two superpowers.
And that's interesting because if that's
what they're trying to do, claim Russian
protection, it hasn't worked because the
United States has already boarded two
vessels that were flying an official
Russian flag.
>> But just to go back to the 16 tankers
that left Venezuela right after Maduro
was captured, what were you able to find
out about those tankers and where they
went? So, of these 16 vessel that
disappeared, we found a couple that were
sailing in the Caribbean Sea, but also a
couple that were already far out in the
Atlantic Ocean.
>> So, we contacted the United States and
said like, "Are you are you aware of
these ships? Are you like are they going
to be stopped? Like, what what's going
on?"
>> You contacted the military.
>> We contacted the military, my colleagues
did, and they said, "Yeah, we're
tracking them and we're trying to seize
some of them." And that actually
happened. At least three of the vessels
that we reported on that had disappeared
were indeed stopped and boarded by the
United States. But what's also very
interesting to me is that some of these
vessels actually seem to have made it
through. There is a group that's still
sailing out there and is by now probably
close to Africa.
>> The zombie race worked out for them. And
there is another group of tankers that
turned around and went back to Venezuela
and seems to be obeying US orders right
now.
>> And what does that mean? It's hard to
know exactly what's happening, but after
Madura was captured, the US basically
started directing where Venezuela's oil
is allowed to go and where these tinkers
can ship it. And they are shipping
Venezuelan oil now to storage sites in
the Caribbean, hoping to sell that
Venezuelan oil on the global world
market, but under the US directive. M
>> so what you kind of see is that some of
these shadow fleet vessels are now
working for what the US wants.
>> I'm still kind of struck by the fact
that these ships are going through all
of this effort to evade the authorities
which seems to have worked except here
you are Christian you have been able to
track so many of them. So I sort of
wonder if you've been able to track so
many of them through Tik Tok or other
means, satellite images. Why has this
been able to go on for so long?
>> So these sanctions come from the US
Treasury Department, but they're not
usually the enforcer of these sanctions,
right? We see that now. Like these ships
are not being stopped by a ship from US
Treasury Department. They're being
stopped by the US Navy or, you know, the
US Coast Guard. And a lot of it relied
on kind of like self-regulation, meaning
like you're let's say an oil trader or a
shipper or whatever, you probably don't
want to touch that Iranian oil because
if you do, you may get in trouble with
the US authorities and that means like
the next time you get a job in like
picking up oil in the US and bringing it
somewhere, you're probably not going to
get that job because you touched Iranian
oil in the past. But there's also
something else that's been going on and
has been allowed to go on and that's to
do with insurance.
>> Insurance.
>> Insurance. Absolutely. Because you can
imagine if this if if an accident
happens with one of these big ships
laden with oil and it hits something in
a port and there's a huge oil spill,
that's going to cost billions and
billions of dollars. So all these ships
need to have insurance. And many ports
in the world, doesn't matter whether
it's Houston or whether it's a port in
Iran or a port in China,
>> these ports will say like, "Hey, do you
have legitimate insurance?" Because, you
know, if something happens, we want to
make sure that someone pays for the
cleanup.
>> So, okay, I understand why you might
want an insurance company to ensure your
boat full of oil. But if you are in a
legally operating boat full of oil, how
do you get insurance?
>> I mean, there are not that many insurers
in the world that can take this on. And
most of these insurance companies are
based in western countries. So what has
been happening is that many of these
shadow fleet oil tankers are lying to
these insurers when they ask for
insurance. But what has happened
recently uh maybe partly because of the
reporting we did on that um and also
just in general an increased scrutiny on
these ships. These American and Western
insurance companies are yanking
insurance away from these ships. So now
these ships are getting insurance from
less reputable companies or sometimes
even companies that may not really exist
that are often linked to Russia, which
is also pretty scary, right? Because
let's say something happens with one of
these shadow fleet tankers. Who the hell
is going to pay for it?
>> Do you have any sense, Christian, as to
how this pressure campaign on the shadow
fleet might end? So one striking thing
that has happened after Trump met with
European leaders at Davos is that Macron
tweeted and said, "Hey, we as France
also stopped and boarded a tanker that
was carrying Russian sanctioned oil." So
that's a striking spillover effect of
Trump's gumpo diplomacy where at least a
one-time ally, France, is now doing the
same thing as the US is doing, which is
stopping and boarding these shadow fleet
tankers. But also what I'm looking at
right now is at a completely different
side of the world, but very much linked,
and that's Iran.
>> [music]
>> President Donald Trump is ramping up
pressure on Iran.
>> Yeah. He says big force is heading to
the region as the country continues to
kill protesters in the streets.
>> On Thursday night, Trump said that he's
moving an armada of military vessels
towards the region. And the next day on
Friday,
>> the Trump administration is issuing new
sanctions on Iran's shadow fleet of oil
vessels as the president sends Iran a
stern warning.
>> The US Treasury [music] Department
announced a new set of sanctions
specifically targeting oil tankers
because the US wants to put more
pressure on Iran given [music] their
crackdown on the anti-government
protests. So what I find very
interesting is that when we remember how
this started in Venezuela
where you had the US military building
up its forces around Venezuela and the
US threatening and then stopping and
boarding tankers [music] linked to
Venezuela's oil trade. We see something
similar happening with Iran right now.
The US is moving its military vessels
there. We see that actually happening on
satellite imagery. And the question is
now are we going to see something
similar happening regarding Iran as what
we saw happening in Venezuela. Hm.
If this effort to stop ghost fleets does
in fact expand, I wonder how much that
threatens not just ghost fleets, but
threatens a disruption of the global oil
market generally. I mean, you could
imagine maybe that's one of the reasons
why sanctions have not been super well
enforced before.
>> Totally. You know, Iran and Russia are
reliant on their income that they have
from exporting their oil and there may
be less shippers willing to transport
their oil and that means that it will be
harder for them for Iran and for Russia
to get their oil out and it will get
more expensive to get that oil and as I
said before like China and also India
are the biggest buyers of this Iranian
Russian oil in most instances and will
be more expensive for China to buy this
oil.
>> But just to focus on the US for a
second, do we have any sense of how any
of that could affect oil prices here
domestically? Like what would change in
the United States?
>> The global oil market doesn't like when
there's uncertainty. So each time a ship
is getting seized, there's a small
uptick in the price of oil, but that
kind of like washes out over time. And
what we hear Trump saying is that, you
know, this is the reason why the United
States is doing what it's doing in
Venezuela. A major reason is the oil, if
not the primary reason, right? So the
idea behind that from a Trump
administration seems to be we want to
get oil prices down uh for the United
States. But the question is whether that
will indeed happen.
>> Okay. And beyond the impact that this
all might have on the global oil market,
what about the broader geopolitical
impacts of enforcing these sanctions,
seizing these oil tankers, like could
the countries that the US is targeting
retaliate in some meaningful way?
>> Well, I'm very curious what is the
reaction going to be of Iran and Russia?
Because so far they haven't done much
except sending out written statements.
It's not that they send their own navy
to retaliate by seizing uh uh oil
tankers of the west, but as pressure
increases on them and if their cash flow
even is more reduced because of these
actions by the United States and now
also by France, are they feeling they
have to take action to kind of get their
oil moving around the world?
Like how are they going to generate
income because they will need that money
[music] to continue to be in power? And
if the US and now also allies of the US
[music] are stopping these vessels,
what's going to happen? So the question
of how these governments are going to
survive [music] is the main question on
my mind moving forward.
[music]
>> Christian, thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much for having me.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Greg Bavino, the Border Patrol official
in charge of President Trump's [music]
immigration enforcement in Minneapolis,
is expected to leave the city, according
to two [music] US officials. The
decision to move him out came days after
he made the unsubstantiated claim
[music] that Alex Prey, the man who was
shot and killed by federal agents, was
planning to quote massacre law
enforcement officers. [music]
Bobino's departure comes as President
Trump moves to tamp down anger over the
second fatal shooting in the city.
Trump's borders [music] are Tom Hman
will now direct ICE operations in the
state
and [music] Israel has said that it's
recovered the remains of its last
hostage from Gaza on Monday. [music]
It paves the way for the next phase of
President Trump's peace plan for the
strip [music] which calls for Israel to
reopen the Rafa border crossing between
Gaza and Egypt. That would allow
Palestinians who fled [music] during the
war to return home for the first time.
Israel had refused to reopen the border
until the remains of the last captive
were returned.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by Shannon
Lynn, Diana Wyn, OliviaNat, Claire
Tennis, [music] and Michael Simon
Johnson. It was edited by Maria Burn,
Patricia Willins, and Paige [music]
Cowat. contains music by Marian Lozano,
Diane Wong, and Dan Powell, and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.